Gather use cases for service accounts as selectors (#274)
kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api: npeps/npep-173-service-account-matches.md

# NPEP-173: NPEP template

* Issue: [#173](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/issues/173)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

Ability to express subjects and peers in (Baseline)AdminNetworkPolicy API
using [Kubernetes service accounts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/service-accounts/).

> ## Goals

Reviewer: I think that the main goal is to provide network policies based on identities, and service accounts are a good primitive in Kubernetes to do that.
I also think that we want to look for this new model to be more scalable to avoid implementation having to track all the existing Pod IPs

@thockin your thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the interest in describing this as being "based on identities", particularly if you say that arbitrary CIDRs can be "identities". How is calling this "based on identities" better than saying "you can select CIDRs or service accounts or pod labels"?

Author: yea I have added the scale and consistency user story to the next section under user stories, maybe I can change the goals to reflect "identity" or refactor the way I am writing "service account as a way to select pods"

Depending on whether we feel this is a new API CRD or part of ANP -> in which case we need to decide also the points Dan is raising:  https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/274/files#r1850516386 we might need to tweak the TLDR/Goals sections here

Reviewer 3: I second mike here. The main benefits I can see are;

1. Users dont interact with CIDRs/IPs.
2. _Some_ implementations of the API dont need to track IPs to provide this functionality (when using identities). 
3. Serviceaccounts are more secure than labels. e.g they dont span namespaces, can not be changed at runtime. 

We dont have to be opinionated on how the API would be implemented, and `service account as a way to select pods` can just be an implementation detail.

Reviewer 2: My comments were based on Cilium's definitions, where (AIUI) everything you can apply a network policy toward is considered an "identity". (e.g., [this blog post](https://isovalent.com/blog/post/intro-to-cilium-network-policies/#decoupling-identity-from-ip-addresses-cilium-endpoint-and-identity) talks about how it turns podSelectors into "identities").

I had initially assumed people were talking about the same thing here. In particular, I had assumed that people were still talking about having a mix of "traditional" NetworkPolicy rules and new service-account-based NetworkPolicy rules, but calling the whole thing "identity-based", which seemed pointless.

But it sounds like what most of the people here actually want is a separate parallel network policy stack, which _only_ uses "identity-based" rules based on service-account/mTLS/SPIFFE/whatever.

Reviewer: > My comments were based on Cilium's definitions, where (AIUI) everything you can apply a network policy toward is considered an "identity". (e.g., [this blog post](https://isovalent.com/blog/post/intro-to-cilium-network-policies/#decoupling-identity-from-ip-addresses-cilium-endpoint-and-identity) talks about how it turns podSelectors into "identities").
> 
> I

cilium identities are clear a no goal, and now I realize that makes the terminology confusing.

If we consider identity as "the set of characteristics that uniquely identify an application (running in a Pod)".
IPs can uniquely identify a Pod, but if a deployment is rolled out the IPs will change (pods don't restart are recreated), so the rules applied directly to IPs will not be identity based.

We can use the labels to identify the pods of the deployments/daemonsets but this identity system seems mostly based on the implementation details of kubernetes, and labels can be added arbitrarily. 

[Service Accounts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/service-accounts/) by the kubernetes docs definitions are "a type of non-human account that, in Kubernetes, provides a distinct identity in a Kubernetes cluster. Application Pods, system components, and entities inside and outside the cluster can use a specific ServiceAccount's credentials to identify as that ServiceAccount. "

I think that ServiceAccounts can work independently on how we translate the API to the implementation, map ServiceAccount to IPs, use ServiceAccount Tokens or Certificates , ....  and also allow us to define cross-cluster or cross-services policies

Author: hmm my understanding was the same as Dan's which is why I called out the non-goal here but seems like that _is_ one of the main goals looks like :)

Author: we discussed this during yesterday's netpol api meeting and agreed that SPIFFEEID can be a non-goal for V0 maybe but maybe good to track the user stories for all of this first

* Implement service account as a way to select pods in the policy's subject

> * Implement service account as a way to select pods in the policy's peers

Reviewer 2: Right, but it's not necessarily "deny all". You could have an AdminNetworkPolicy that says:

```
egress:
  - action: Deny
    to:
      - pods:
          podSelector: ...
  - action: Allow
    to:
      - serviceAccount: foo
  - action: Deny
    to:
      - pods:
          podSelector: ...
```

where the identity-based part of the policy is sandwiched between two non-identity-based parts.

There does not seem to be any plausible way to have the `podSelector` parts of that rule be implemented by the network plugin but have the `serviceAccount` part be implemented by the mesh (without implementation-specific coordination between them, or, obviously, if the network plugin _is_ the mesh).

More generally, it feels like all network policy (in the allow/deny sense) needs to be implemented by a single component. Or at least, for every pair of destinations A and B, there must be only a single component implementing network policy between them. (eg, you could potentially have a service mesh doing TLS-based policy for pod-to-pod traffic, with another network plugin doing IP-based policy for pod-to-external and external-to-pod traffic).

> * Implement service account as a way to select pods in the policy's peers

Author: this is a good "UNRESOLVED NEED TO THINK ABOUT" discussion that I should probably capture in one of the subsections, will add a unresolved discussions section and start putting these there

## Non-Goals

> * There might be other identity management constructs like SPIFFE IDs which are outside the scope of this enhancement. We can only provide a way to select constructs known to core Kubernetes.

Author: Implementor bottlenecks - since implementations might not want to consume the whole CRD...

Author: there was a conclusion at kubecon that it makes more sense for it to be a new CRD?

Author: what about L7 layer CRD instead of the L3/L4 matches since if its in the policy its usually for L4/L3 IP based matches

Reviewer 4: The typical service mesh pattern is required/expected identity-based authorization policy at L4 (default deny, allow TCP connection based on identity only if a lower level like CNI did not already drop/block the attempt at L3), with optional support for additional constraints at L7 (such as only allowing requests from a given identity on specific paths).

Author: thanks @mikemorris for the insights here! very valuable, I have tried to capture some parts of this point and the point @danwinship mentioned above under "unresolved discussions" so that its written down somewhere..

## Introduction

Every pod in Kubernetes will have an associated service account. If user does not explicitly provide a service account, a default service account is created in the namespace. A given pod will always have 1 service account associated with itself. So instead of using pod labels as a way of selecting pods sometimes there might be use cases to use service accounts as a way of selecting the pods. This NPEP tries to capture the design details for service accounts as selectors for policies.

## User-Stories/Use-Cases

> 1. **As a** cluster admin **I want** to select pods using their service accounts instead of labels **so that** I can avoid having to setup webhooks and validation admission policies to prevent users from changing labels on their namespaces and pods that will make my policy start/stop matching the traffic which is undesired

Reviewer: I don't think we want to "select pods" as using the service accounts as an aggregation of pods, I think we want to provide identities to the applications and then implement policies based on those identities, how to implement it is a different thing.

Author: hmm during the kubecon meeting I thought for the purpose of this working group if we were to put it into (admin) network policies then it has to be pods because we don't really have any other identity in core kubernetes that the API recognises and do we define abstract things in the API? Plus the L3/L4 is only where we implement policies not at L7,
however if we plan to go with new CRD for expressing this then we could call it an identity but even then service account today is only for pods right? what are the other identites we plan to cover use cases for? I called our SPIFFE use case as non goal since we don't plan to address that in this API right? I can move it out of the non-goals if the word "identity" is better suited than "serviceaccounts of pods"

Reviewer 5: I personally think we should have a separate API for this that is strictly focused on identities. The starting point has to be identities based on Service Accounts that both mesh and CNI implementations would have a path to implement. 

>however if we plan to go with new CRD for expressing this then we could call it an identity but even then service account today is only for pods right? what are the other identites we plan to cover use cases for? I called our SPIFFE use case as non goal since we don't plan to address that in this API right? I can move it out of the non-goals if the word "identity" is better suited than "serviceaccounts of pods"

I'd personally rather focus on identity, with ServiceAccount as our starting point. Even though that's roughly the same thing, it leaves room for future expansion into other identities, potentially following a SPIFFE format. That seems like one of the key benefits of an identity-based policy, so I'd like to ensure we're leaving room in the API to eventually support identities outside of the local cluster.

> 2. **As a** cluster admin **I want** to select pods using their service accounts instead of labels **so that** I can avoid the scale impact caused due to mutation of pod/namespace labels that will cause a churn which makes my CNI implementation react to that every time user changes a label.

Reviewer: If this ends on translatiing service accounts to Pods, the scale problem is going to be worse, because CNI/Netwokr plugins will need to watch both service accounts and pod objects, today they just watch one

Reviewer 2: no, the idea is that they'd just match on `pod.spec.serviceAccountName`. They don't have to look at the actual `ServiceAccounts` at all

Author: yea I think we all agreed on that day "using labels to select serviceAccounts" should be dropped cause then it just re-introduces the problems and instead directly match on the name of the account, but yea that is an implementation detail

> 3. **As a** cluster admin **I want** to select pods using their service accounts instead of labels **since** I want to have eventual consistency of that policy in the cluster. I don't have a use case for dynamic selection of workloads and want to use service accounts instead of labels for that very same reason

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **As a** cluster admin my workloads have inmutable identities and **I want** to apply policies per workloads using their service accounts instead of labels **since** I want to have eventual consistency of that policy in the cluster. 
```

Author: ack accepted this suggestion, thanks @aojea

# NPEP-173: NPEP template

* Issue: [#173](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/issues/173)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

Ability to create policies that control network traffic based on workload identities a.ka.
[Kubernetes service accounts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/service-accounts/).

## Goals

* Use service accounts (identities) as a way of describing (admin) network policies for pods

## Non-Goals

> * There might be other identity management constructs like SPIFFE IDs which

Reviewer 6: It's not impossible, perhaps, that we could linke SPIFFE IDs to service accounts, at least superfiailly?  It would not be crypto-strong but it might indicate that someone with elevated authority (status) has asserted that namespace "foo", ServiceAccount "bar" has the same intended scope as SPIFFE "mycompany.com/ns/foo/id/bar" or whatever?

This is a bit outside my domain, maybe it's a terrible idea if you have more than half a clue..

are outside the scope of this enhancement. We can only provide a way to select
constructs known to core Kubernetes.

## Introduction

> Every pod in Kubernetes will have an associated service account. If user does

Reviewer 6: Sadly, not "every" -- mirror pods (created by kubelet in response to on-node manifests) do not have an SA, apparently.

not explicitly provide a service account, a default service account is created

> in the namespace. A given pod will always have 1 service account associated

Reviewer 6: Thie things that make SA better than labels:

* Other than mirror pods, every pod has exactly 1 SA
* It can't change over time (simpler management)
* It is bounded in size (as opposed to selectors which can have a large number of terms) which makes it friendlier to on-the-wire implementations
* It's aligned to mesh ideas of identity
* It's often associated with the scope of a Service anyway

It is worse in 1 main way: if I want to quarantine a pod, how?  Today I can just change a label.

with itself. So instead of using pod labels as a way of selecting pods sometimes
there might be use cases to use service accounts as a way of selecting the pods.
This NPEP tries to capture the design details for service accounts as selectors
for policies.

> ## User-Stories/Use-Cases

Reviewer 3: one of the goals/motivation is also to decrease the implementation complexity and allow larger scale. I think we want to cover this here or in the goals section

Author: @LiorLieberman: check user story2 does that cover what you had in mind? If its not clear and requires clarity I can try to reword it based on suggestions

1. **As a** cluster admin **I want** to select pods using their service accounts
   instead of labels **so that** I can avoid having to setup webhooks and
   validation admission policies to prevent users from changing labels on their
   namespaces and pods that will make my policy start/stop matching the traffic

>    which is undesired

Reviewer 7: I am not sure I understand this user story: the only difference between labels vs serviceAccount here is that labels can be changed after pod creation, and serviceAccount can't. But the user can still create a new serviceAccount and a new pod using this account, that will not "match" a policy.
This user story kinda suggests that admin sets up ANPs using pod labels, and also creates or labels all pods in the cluster to match created ANPs, and doesn't want the users to be able to change those pod labels?

Author: >  the only difference between labels vs serviceAccount here is that labels can be changed after pod creation, and serviceAccount can't. But the user can still create a new serviceAccount and a new pod using this account, that will not "match" a policy.

yes and that is exactly the use case I am trying to cover which is the fact that labels are mutable on pods and service accounts are not - create and delete of pods for sure is going to cause the same churn for both selectors, but updates of pods needs that extra step/precaution for labels.
happy to reword this based on suggestions if something is not clear

2. **As a** cluster admin **I want** to select pods using their service accounts
   instead of labels **so that** I can avoid the scale impact caused due to
   mutation of pod/namespace labels that will cause a churn which makes my CNI
   implementation react to that every time user changes a label.
3. **As a** cluster admin my workloads have immutable identities and **I want**
   to apply policies per workloads using their service accounts instead of labels
   **since** I want to have eventual consistency of that policy in the cluster.

> 

Author: hmm so this would be the non-goal I had but we can revisit this and I can try to add this user story, let me learn more about the istio use case here and see if for each of my above use cases I can come up with concrete examples?

## Unresolved Discussions

* How to provide a standard way to configure/describe the service mesh behavior
  of intercepting traffic and deciding whether to allow it based on information
  in the TLS packets?
  * NetworkPolicies apply on L3 and L4 while Meshes operate at L7 mostly. So when
    trying to express "denyAll connections except the allowed serviceAccount to
    serviceAccount connections"; how do we split the enforcement in this scenario
    between the CNI plugin that implementations the network policy at L3/L4 and
    service mesh implementation that implements the policy at L7?
    * One way is to probably split the implementation responsibility:

>       1. CNI plugin can take of implementing denyAll connections and

Reviewer: This is assuming that is either CNI plugin or service mesh, and can perfectly be another component implementing it, see kube-network-policies per example ... I think we need to be agnostic of the implementation and focus on the behaviors we want to implement ... "we want to express that a group of pods using a specific service account can or can not communicate with another group identified by another service account"

>          allowed serviceAccount to serviceAccount connections upto L3/L4

Reviewer 2: The problem with this, as I was saying in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/274#discussion_r1850516386, is that it seems pointless. If this is going to work correctly, without accidentally allowing any connections that aren't supposed to be allowed, then the ANP/NP implementation needs to let through _exactly_ the set of connections that the mesh implementation is going to inspect, which implies it needs to understand "serviceAccount selectors" and how they correspond to pod IP addresses, but at that point, it can just validate the serviceAccount selectors itself based entirely on IPs, and the semantics of the service mesh guarantee that this is exactly equivalent to validating based on the TLS certificates, so the mesh doesn't actually have to do anything.

----

So we've been thinking about the TLS-based validation as being something roughly parallel to the "NetworkPolicy" step of our policy evaluation chain:

```text
          +--------------------+    
          | AdminNetworkPolicy |    
          +--------------------+    
                    /\              
                  /    \                        
                /        \                      
  +---------------+    +------------------+
  | NetworkPolicy |    | TLS-based policy |
  +---------------+    +------------------+                                          
                \        /          
                  \    /            
                    \/              
      +----------------------------+
      | BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy |
      +----------------------------+                                    
```

but what if instead it was parallel to the BANP step?

```text
          +--------------------+    
          | AdminNetworkPolicy |    
          +--------------------+    
                     |              
                     |              
                     |              
             +---------------+                                         
             | NetworkPolicy |                                         
             +---------------+                                          
                    / \             
                  /     \           
                /         \         
           +------+    +-----------+
           | BANP |    | TLS-based |
           +------+    +-----------+
```

We'd say, if you want to use TLS-based policy, then that becomes the baseline (at least for pod-to-pod traffic). Then we don't have to worry about interleaving IP-based and TLS-based policy, because you'd only reach the TLS-based policy step if you had already exhausted the IP-based steps. (This doesn't mean you can't have "deny all unless accepted by serviceAccount match", it just means that the "deny all" part has to be implemented by the TLS-based policy implementation rather than by the core ANP/NP implementation in this case.)

This may go with the idea I had vaguely tossed out about replacing BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy with "[ClusterDefaultPolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/178#issuecomment-1847446370)" as part of trying to make tenancy make sense...

Reviewer 5: > at that point, it can just validate the serviceAccount selectors itself based entirely on IPs, and the semantics of the service mesh guarantee that this is exactly equivalent to validating based on the TLS certificates, so the mesh doesn't actually have to do anything.

Isn't there some eventual consistency at play here? With a TLS certificate, I know the identity of the Pod with confidence. With an IP address, I'm assuming it matches the Pod that had that IP based on the most recent data I have, but if my Pod -> IP mapping is out of date, this isn't as strong of a guarantee as a TLS cert is.

> This doesn't mean you can't have "deny all unless accepted by serviceAccount match", it just means that the "deny all" part has to be implemented by the TLS-based policy implementation rather than by the core ANP/NP implementation in this case.

+1, I think I was trying to get to a similar point in another comment. "Deny all" could also be implemented at the identity-based policy layer.

>This may go with the idea I had vaguely tossed out about replacing BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy with "https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/178#issuecomment-1847446370" as part of trying to make tenancy make sense...

It would definitely be worth exploring a way to express "default deny" in a sufficiently generic way that any category of implementation could support it. For example, that seemed to be focused on namespace granularity, which could be some common ground in terms of implementability.

      2. service mesh implementation can implement the allowed serviceAccount to

>          serviceAccount connections on L7

Reviewer 3: This concerns me the most. Cant think of a good way to divide the responsibility between mesh and cni in the same API without creating an extremely complex UX (and perhaps less portable experience)

    * NOTE: There are some service mesh implementations which have a
      CNI component in them that collapses the logic of enforcement - so maybe
      that might become a requirement that the implementation be able to handle
      end to end enforcement of the full policy

>   * We might also want to express additional constraints at L7 (such as only

Reviewer: I don't think we should put this in scope, L7 is a totally different layer with much more complexity and infinite number of protocols with different semantics

Reviewer 3: +1 I think we should not care about it and leave it to Gateway/mesh implementations. Most probably will be a different API.

Reviewer 8: I generally agree. FWIW Istio literally splits these layers into two components (so there are really 3 layers in the system: L3/L4 CNI, L4 TLS, L7 TLS + HTTP)

Author: ack; if we shouldn't worry about additional L7 requests I can remove this point, I think I was trying to capture some talking points from https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/274#discussion_r1849530344 but I can remove this given we probably don't want to club that here

    allowing requests from a given identity on specific paths or with specific
    HTTP/gRPC methods) - Ideally we would want these extra fields to be coexisting
    with the L3/L4 Authorization policy

> * Should this really be part of AdminNetworkPolicy and NetworkPolicy APIs or should

Reviewer: I vote for New CRD, we risk overloading existing APIs that are already hard to implement efficiently

  this be a new CRD?
  * Making it part of existing APIs: Existing network policy APIs are pretty heavy
    with other types of selectors like namespaces, pods, nodes, networks, fqdns and
    expecting mesh implementations to implement the full CRD just to get the identity
    based selection might not be practical

>   * Making it part of new API: We fall back to compatibility problem of the different

Reviewer: why compatibility issues, the different policies applies should be an AND, in which sense is this incompatible?

Reviewer 3: I dont see compatibility issues but I can see terrible UX if we end up with another API which sits *on top* of netpol. This means that as a user, to allow point A to talk with point B on a cluster with default deny I need to:
  1. add a netpol to allow the traffic
  2. add an identity-based policy to allow it
  3. potentially add an L7 policy if I want L7 attributes based policy.

Reviewer 5: I think there are a non-trivial set of implementations that would like to support an identity-based version of network policy, but would not support the additional set of APIs based on label selectors. To me, that suggests that it would be cleaner to have a new API focused on identity-based APIs. 

I agree that @LiorLieberman's example is not a great UX, but I'd hope that most users would be fully served by only one of these APIs and would not need to layer like that. Could we express default deny within this new policy to avoid layering?

Reviewer 8: FWIW in Istio we would ideally have a policy that consists only of SA/identity and not pod label selectors.

Author: > why compatibility issues, the different policies applies should be an AND, in which sense is this incompatible?

probably compatibility is not the right word here, but I meant the layering problem, but if we agree "AND" of the APIs is what we are after wherein L3/L4 netpol API is denying a connection but the new identity API one wants to allow that (for podsSAs) then we deny cause we need it to be allow on all APIs and there is one API denying the connection even if the other API explicitly allows it?

Reviewer 3: > Could we express default deny within this new policy to avoid layering?
@aojea interested in your thoughts regarding default deny with this
